In this session, we will be looking at Shell
variables, various aspects of Shell variables
such as the creation, the inspection of those
variables, the values, modification of those
variables and lists of those variables in
two different types of arrays.
So, the way to create a variable is directly
by assigning a value, and the variable should
not contain a digit at the beginning of the
name. It can contain alphanumeric characters
as well as an underscore. There should not
be any space before or after the equal to
sign. And if the value is a number, you can
directly provide it on the command prompt.
But if it has a space, or if it is a string
value, it is safer to enclose it in quotes.
You may also assign the output of a command
as a value to a variable by using the command
in the back quotes, we will see that in a
demo.
By exporting a variable, what we mean is making
the value of that variable available to a
shell that is spawned by the current shell.
And you can do it directly by assigning a
value to that variable and exporting it in
one line or by creating the variable and then
exporting that on the command prompt.
And the variable value itself can be displayed
by using the echo command. The dollar sign
at the beginning of the variable name should
not be forgotten. It is always safe to use
the name of the variable within the braces
or the flower brackets. As you will see there
is a lot of manipulation that we could do
to the value of the variable by inserting
certain triggers are commands within the braces.
So, it is always a good idea to use the braces
while using the values of variables.
To remove a variable it is quite simple, you
could just unset the variable. You could also
remove the value of the variable by placing
nothing after the equal to sign. You could
use the same command as what you would use
for creating the variable where you write
like my var is equal to and then a value.
So, if you skip the value and press enter,
then the value will be null. And that is also
one way by which you remove the content of
a variable.
If you want to test if a variable is available
in the memory or not, you could use the test
conditions syntax of the bash language and
minus v option is to check whether the variable
is set. You could check the status of the
output of the test command to see if the variable
was available or not. We have already looked
at the error codes or written codes of various
commands on bash prompt earlier.
You could also test if the variable is available
in the memory or not in indirect manner by
using the minus z option. And here you could
actually see that the character x can be replaced
with any other character and it would work
opposite to the minus v option that we have
seen just now.
If you are using a variable and if you would
like to have a default value in situations
where the variable is not set, then there
is a syntax available within the braces you
could have a colon and a minus symbol and
then you can provide the value that should
be used as a default in case the variable
is not set. Remember, there should be no spaces
before or after the colon and you are using
the syntax within the braces. The logic is
if the variable is set, then it will display
the value and if it is not set, then it would
display the value that is given in the command
here which is default.
If you wish you could set a default value
to the variable if it was not set and the
syntax is here colon equal to and the logic
is that if the variable is set, then its own
value will be used. But if it is not set,
then the variable will be set to the value
that is given in this command like default
and that variable and that value will then
be used.
You could use the reverse logic where if the
variable is set, then you should display a
particular value. Here in this case, we are
saying default and if the variable is not
set, then nothing will be done. The two logics
that are there with the plus and minus signs,
when combined can be used to have whichever
logical loop that you would like to have in
a shell script, as you will learn later.
Very often, we are interested in knowing what
are the variables that are actually stored
in the memory while you are operating within
the bash shell. So, you could actually print
out the names of the variables by using this
command, echo dollar within the braces, exclamation
mark, followed by the character with which
you would search for the names of the variables,
and then a pattern. So, H star would mean
that all the variable names which starts with
H will then be displayed on the screen. You
could have any other pattern that is supported
by the bash syntax.
Now, the length of the string contained as
a value of a variable can also be counted
directly. And it could be done using the pound
symbol or hash symbol in front of the variable
within the braces. In case the variable is
not set, then the value will be 0.
You could extract a slice of a string value
of a variable by providing what is the offset
and the number of characters in the slice
that you would like to print out by using
the syntax where there are two colons separating
the offset and the slice length. If the slides
length is larger than the length of the string,
then what is available in the string only
will be displayed. The offset can also be
negative, only thing is that you need to provide
a space after the colon to avoid confusion
with the previous usage of colon minus symbol.
And you could also have the offset coming
from the right-hand side of the string.
If you would like to match a pattern within
the value of a shell variable and print whatever
is not matching, then that can be done using
the hash symbol. The pattern can be similar
to the regular expressions that we will be
learning later on. But it could just be a
dot and a star so that you could look for
filename extensions are parts of a particular
file name.
If you use the pound symbol twice, it means
that the pattern matching will be done as
many times as possible within the value of
the variable. And if it is used once it means
that the pattern matching is done only once.
So, whatever is matching the pattern will
be removed and the rest of it will be displayed
on the screen.
Sometimes you want to actually display what
is matching the pattern rather than remove
it. So, that is accomplished by using the
percentage symbol. So, a single percentage
symbol is used to match only once and it is
used twice to match it as many times as possible.
So, whatever is the matching pattern will
be displayed on the screen.
And sometimes you may want to match a pattern
and replace that pattern with another string.
So, it is like search and replace but performed
on a single string, which is the value of
a variable here in this case it is myvar.
So, if you use a forward slash once, it means
the matching is done only once. And if you
use the forward slash twice, it means that
the pattern is matched as many times as possible
within the string. And then all those patterns
will be replaced with the string that is given
for the replacement.
You could also do the pattern matching and
replacing going by the location of the string.
So, if you want to do the pattern matching
only at the beginning of the string, you could
use a pound symbol or a hash symbol after
the forward slash. And if you would like to
have the matching done only at the end of
a string, then you could use the percentage
symbol after the forward slash.
Now, you can display the value of a variable
by converting the case of the characters within
the string. And you could do it for the first
character or for all the characters to the
lowercase or uppercase. As you can see from
here, the comma symbol indicates that it is
the lowercase that has to be printed out.
The caret symbol indicates that it is the
uppercase that has to be printed out the original
value of the variable is not changed, only
the display will be modified as you have asked
with these trigger commands within the braces.
You can restrict what type of values can be
assigned to any variable. So, you can restrict
it to be only integer type, or lowercase type
or uppercase type or even read only by using
the options like i, l, u and r. Remember that
if you make a variable Read Only, then you
cannot modify it after that. And if you want
to do it, you may have to start the bash all
over again so that it will forget that particular
variable.
If you want to remove the restrictions after
having given those to a particular variable,
you could do it by changing the option from
minus to plus. So, plus i would actually remove
the restrictions of integers to be assigned
to the variable myvar. So, plus l is removing
the restriction of the lowercase or the variable
myvar.
Plus, u to remove the restriction on only
uppercase to be assigned for the variable
myvar and plus r cannot be done, because once
you have already given a minus r attribute,
then myvar is actually read only and you cannot
change the attribute including the restriction
of read only.
Variables can also be stored as arrays within
the shell environment, which is very powerful,
because these operations are quite fast. So,
you can declare a particular name as an array
using the minus small a, if you wanted it
as an index array. So, you could do various
operations such as assigning the value to
a particular element of the array.
And remember that unlike the arrays in C language
or C++, the indices need not be contiguous,
you could actually use any integer index for
the indexed arrays. You can print the value
of any specific element of the array by using
the syntax of square brackets, which is quite
common for you if you are familiar with the
other programming languages.
By providing a hash in front of the array
name, and an add symbol within the square
brackets, you are conveying that you would
like the command to be interpreted for all
the elements that are in the array. And by
hash you are asking to count. So, you would
get the output as the number of elements in
the array.
And the exclamation mark would indicate that
you are interested in knowing what are the
indices that are used by the array. And the
add symbol tells that you would like to have
the list of all the indices used in the array.
And you could also list out all the variables
the values of the variables stored in the
array by simply using the syntax as given
here, dollar and within the braces array name
and in the square brackets, you give an add
symbol which is like a wild character to run
through all the elements of the array.
And you can actually knock off any specific
element in the array by providing its index
value to the unset command. And you can also
append an element to the array by using the
syntax similar to the C language. So, plus
is equal to would actually append the value
at the end of the array. And when you are
appending the index will be taken appropriately.
Associative arrays or hashes are also available
within the bash environment and these are
very powerful because the index can be just
anything, it can be an integer or a string.
So, here is an example of a hash declared
by using the option minus A, capital A and
the index ‘a’ as a character is used to
store an element with the value as given here.
And you could do most of the operations similar
to the associative arrays except the appending
operation, which is not possible because there
is nothing called at the end of the array,
because there is no sequence part of the indices
that are used in a hash.
So, please remember that the shell variable
manipulations are very fast. And therefore,
if you are able to perform an operation using
shell variable manipulations, then your script
will be running very fast. So, mastering these
options will be very valuable to you when
you write your scripts.
This session is about shell variables, we
will learn how to create shell variables,
inspect them, edit them for display, also
using command output to store as a value in
a shell variable. We will also learn how to
use an array of variables in the shell environment,
let us get started with the demo.
So, the way to create a shell variable is
directly to use the name let us say I will
create a variable called myvar and then equals
and then we can give the value. It can be
numerical, or a string. So, I will choose
the value to be numerical, namely 10. To inspect
the value of this variable, we would use the
command echo and the dollar sign followed
by the name of the variable.
We could actually overwrite the value stored
using any other type. So, here I store a string
in the variable myvar. And you could inspect
the value of the variable myvar and you see
that it has changed. Now, what kind of a restrictions
are there in assigning values for variables
in the shell environment?
It will be evident you could actually make
the case for the shell variable names. So,
you could have something like this myvar is
equal to 10. So, you could mix the cases that
is fine. You could also use digits within
the name like this, you can see that you can
use both alphabetical as well as numeric characters
in giving the names. However, there is a restriction
you cannot start the name of a variable using
a digit.
So, try that out and you see that it is actually
going into a little bit of a evaluation and
then conses that it is actually a command
and then therefore, such a command does not
take this. So, it does not actually create
a variable by the name 10Myvar. So, you cannot
start the name of a variable with digits.
If you want you can actually use the underscore
as a character to make your variables readable.
So, here he would then see that, you can actually
display the value of the variable Myvar underscore
New, underscore is a poor man's way of representing
a space for easy readability. You could also
use numbers for that purpose and you could
see that it is all working quite fine.
So, the lesson is that you could have the
variables named either in small case or uppercase,
you can also mix them up, you could use underscore
as a part of the name, you could also use
digits, but only thing is that you cannot
start the name of a variable using a digit.
Now, while assigning the value is when the
variable also is getting created. But the
equal to sign should not be surrounded by
space for you to write in a legible fashion.
So, consider this for example. So, that will
actually not work because Myvar is then interpreted
as a command because there is a space after
that. So, you should not have any space after
the variable name, if you are going to assign
a value and create that variable in the process
of writing that command. Variable that we
have used here I have used a quotes now what
happens if I do not use a quotes?
Let us see what happens when we assign a value
to a variable with a space in that particular
string. So, here it has failed. So, how do
I know that? I can inspect the return status
and it says there is a problem there. So,
127 means that the return code says that the
command was not found.
So, if I now try to inspect what would be
the value of the variable, and you will see
that there is a null which means that entire
command was neglected. And if we did not end
up in assigning value to the variable myvar.
Now, we can accomplish that correctly by enclosing
the space of the string not to be interpreted
as a delimiter. So, the entire string has
to be enclosed in quotes. So, you could now
see the value of the variable and it comes
out quite fine.
Now, for some reason, you would like to remove
this variable. So, you could use a command
called unset. So, if you say unset myvar,
then the variable is removed from the memory
and you could just try it out. And you see
that there is a null so which means that the
variable is no longer there in the memory.
Now, you will know that the true and false
used as 0 and 1 respectively, can also be
used to check whether a particular variable
is present in the system or not. So, let us
try that out by using a construction which
will be put to use in shell scripts shortly.
But for now, we can actually already try it
on the command line.
So, the syntax is as follows. Let us say I
want to know whether there is any variable
by name myvar. So, what I would do is, first
let us check what is this command true and
you see that it is always returning the success
state. So, if I type echo dollar percent mark
or return status, it says 0 which means it
is true, is always returning a success state
and if I run a command false, then you will
see that the return code is 1.
So, we can now use this as a way to check
whether the variable is present or not by
doing a a check, so, we will do that by using
a particular construction. So, minus v and
then the name of the variable. So, if you
do this it would run and then the return code
will tell whether that variable was present
or not.
You see that the return value is 1 which means
that the output of this particular construction
that we have done the test condition gave
false which means that myvar is not existing.
Now, we do the same thing by creating the
variable now myvar is equal to and let us
say 10 and then run the same code which is
basically to test for the variable being present
or not.
And then echo dollar question mark and you
see that the code has changed to true which
means that minus v myvar is a way by which
we can check whether the variable is present
in the memory or not. You could also test
it in a different manner that I will illustrate
now, first I will remove the variable.
So, there is another way by which we can test
for the variable this is by using the minus
z test. So, first I will remove the variable
that I want to check first so that I am sure
that such a thing does not exist. So, also
verify it does not exist. So, now we do the
test minus Z dollar the variable name variable
name is myvar and then plus any string which
will be used as a replacement in case the
variable was not present okay. Now, you see
that the test has resulted in 0. Now, the
test has resistant false. This is also one
more way by which you can go about checking
whether the variable is present or not, but
this is a little bit roundabout.
Now, you have seen that I have used the braces
or flower brackets to enclose the variable
name. So, this is for a particular purpose
I will illustrate that to you now. So, myvar
is equal to let us say a file name so, I will
have it as a string. Now, echo dollar myvar
would display that on the screen. Now, I would
like to display a file name with an extension
as a part of some program.
So, let us say I want to do it this manner.
So, you see that the extension has come. So,
dot txt txt has come because it has not been
interpreted as a part of the variable name.
Now, I would like to have an underscore there
and you see what would happen. So, I was expecting
now file name underscore txt to come and it
does not come because now the interpretation
is that myvar underscore txt is the entire
name of the variable which actually does not
exist.
So, how do we overcome, this is where the
braces will come up to us to tell clearly
what is the name of the variable and what
is not by using those braces. So, what I would
do now here is in this manner. So, now you
see that it is becoming clear that myvar is
the name of the variable and after that the
rest of it is part of the string that I want
to happen. And now you see that it behaves
as we originally wanted.
So, here is an illustration to tell you that
the flower brackets or braces are very useful
in stating clearly what is the name of the
variable and whatever comes after that will
be used as part of the string. Now, this can
also be used outside of the quotes. So, you
could also do this way and that works quite
fine as we have seen in the previous example.
Now, let us see whether this variable that
we have created, does it get passed on to
the shell or any other program that has been
launched within the shell? So, what I would
do is myvar is equal to let us say 3.14. So,
a variable name is myvar and it is holding
a value 3.14. Now, what I will do is I will
go down into one more level of bash and ps
minus minus forest and you will see that we
are actually one level below.
And here I would like to check whether this
variable was present, and you see that it
is not present. So, which means that the variable
that is created in any shell is not automatically
passed on to a sub shell. So, what do I do
to make sure that it is passed on? So, for
that, let me come back to the parent shell
and confirm that we are in the parent shell.
And what we do is we use a command export
to ensure that this variable is then made
available to all the children that are spawned
by this particular shell.
Verify that variable is available. And now
I launch one sub shell. And in that we verify
that we are in the sub shell. And in that
I check whether this particular variable is
present. And you can see that it is now available.
So, this shows that when you use export, then
the variable is available to the child shell.
Now, what happens when we modify the variable
within the child shell, so, that I would do
by saying myvar is equal to 4.56 echo my var.
Now, I come back to the parent shell and look
at the variable. And you see that it remains
same as what we originally have set, which
means that when a variable is exported, then
it is available for the child shell, but when
the child shell modifies the value of the
variable, that modification is not reflected
in the value of the variable in the parent
shell. So, it is only then modified within
the local environment, we could also verify
that by using the export within the child
shell also.
So, we do the same thing again myvar is equal
to 3.14 and check that out bash and here again,
what we would do is export myvar is equal
to echo 4.56. And now I come back to the parent
shell, echo myvar, and you see that even though
you did export within the child shell, it
has not changed the value of the variable
in the parent shell.
So, which means that the parent shell is holding
the value of the variable and though it is
exported and getting modified by the child
shall it is not (at) affecting the value within
the parent shell. This is something that is
very useful in some of the compiler flags
that we may be using in compiling large packages
when we use open source software.
Now, we have seen that there are many commands
that would give you output and we would like
to have them stored as variables. So, that
is something that is accomplished by using
what is called the back quote, which is also
the character that comes if you use the tilda
key in the US keyboard layout. So, I will
just to demonstrate that to you now.
So, the command date would give you the date
output. So, if you have a variable created,
mydate is equal to, now you see the quotation
symbol that I have used here, it is a single
code but a back quote, it is not to be confused
with the single code which is straight up
are the double code which is appearing with
two dashes. So, it is a single quote, but
appearing below the tilde symbol on the keyboard.
So, it is called the back quote.
So, the back quote is used for a very specific
purpose, the output of the command is then
used as a value for the particular variable
which you are assigning. So in this case,
mydate is the name of the variable and the
value of that variable will be the output
given by the date command. So, let us just
check that out.
So, you see that the variable my date has
a string which is basically the date command
output. Now, the date command output has changed
now because the time is now 11:08. But, if
you echo them, it is still showing 11:07 which
means if it is not dynamic, it is only inserted
as a value at the instance that the command
is run and after that it remains a string
alone. So, it is not a dynamically updated
one.
You could also combine the echo command along
with this particular back quote. So, let us
do that here. So, you see that the mydate
variable is now containing the string, which
is the output of the command echo, which I
have written here. So, whatever is the command
that will be executed and that would then
be used as the value of the variable.
Now, this is quite useful because we could
then now store the string and manipulate it
using the means that are available for manipulation
of value of a variable within the shell environment
because now that you have what a string then
you can manipulate it the way you like. So,
now, let us see what are the kinds of manipulations
that are available for variables within the
BASH environment.
So, I am just cleaning up the memory and I
want to now show you how we go about manipulating
the variables within the shell environment.
So, let us say that we have a command where
we would like to use a value if the particular
variable does not exist, for some reason it
was not set, but you still would like to go
ahead and have that as a part of your script.
So, that can be accomplished by certain construction
within the braces and that is the beginning
of various manipulations that are possible.
So, we will go step by step. So, first is
that if there is any variable you want to
print its output, you would put it us dollar
myvar and you could actually have the braces
to indicate that the variable is now, you
can now start becoming comfortable by using
the flower brackets for the variable name
because there are a lot of characters that
we will be inserting within the power brackets
because they are all what will actually manipulate
the value.
So, the very first manipulation is the variable
is not actually available, but we would like
to have the echo command display something
which is like a default value in case the
variable is not available. So, this can be
achieved as follows. So, a colon is very popularly
used to perform some operations, so we have
to get used to that. So, after colon a bunch
of characters will tell what operation we
are doing.
So, there is a minus that is there so, which
is sort of indicating that if the value is
not present, then what should be the value
that should be displayed. So, the display
value let us say is hello. Now, you see that
you have got some output on the screen and
output is the default string that has been
mentioned within the braces, you could actually
have any other string also, and you could
also use the quotation symbols to contain
it. So, you can say that myvar is not set.
So, now you can see that the echo command
is a little bit more useful. If you have done
only this, then the output is null and it
is not clear whether the variable was present
or not, or was it actually set with a blank
character. So, that was not clear. But, if
you see the way we have written here up, then
it is a bit more useful because there is a
particular string that is displayed as a message
on the screen in case the variable was not
set.
So, this is a way by which you can give default
values to variables in the process of using
them in case you are not sure whether they
are set or not. Now, here you see that even
though we have displayed a string, it is not
yet in the variable because as you can see
from this command, that it is still empty,
which means that to the myvar is not yet set,
we have only displayed a particular string,
but it is not set.
But, if you want to actually set the value
if it was not set already, then we could do
this way colon equals and hello. And now you
see that the echo command is giving you the
default value, but at the same time the variable
also has been set. So, earlier it was not
set, but now it is said because the colon
equal to is indicating that if the variable
myvar is not set, then set it to the value
that is specified after the equal to symbol
which is basically a string hello.
So, this is a very useful way by which we
can actually ensure the default behavior to
be what we want by specifying those default
values for the variables. Now, if I run the
code again what would happen; you see that
the variable myvar is present and therefore,
there is nothing that is going to happen to
it and it is retaining the real value and
you see that the capital HELLO has not come
into the picture at all because it is only
when the variable myvar is not set that any
action is going to be performed after the
colon symbol what is indicated there.
So, we will also do that in this command,
for example here this command we will actually
try that out here, so, you see that the message
is not displayed. The value of the variable
is displayed because it is set. So, only if
it is unset, then the action after the colon
will start taking into effect.
Now, you can also display a message on the
screen if the variable was not set in the
following manner. So, for that I would actually
remove this variable echo dollar myvar colon
question mark and then a string. So, you see
that there is a display that is done and it
is also giving you a little bit more information.
So, where it is actually telling about the
particular variable and giving you a display
of the debug message that you can put.
So, this is some way by which you are alerting
that particular variable is not present. In
what way is it is different from this command
if you see is that in this command the echo
variable is behaving as if the value of that
particular variable is what is in the string.
But here, it is more clear that it is actually
a message.
Now, there is a opposite action of the minus
symbol which is basically to set value if
it was actually present. So, let us try that
out here. So, the variable is present. So,
now colon plus and if it is present, then
I want to do some particular action, so that
I would have it as let us say capital HELLO
and you see that the variable is displaying
a particular string, which is basically if
it is present.
Now, I would actually unset and then I try
this command again and it is not working which
means that only if myvar is present, then
the action that is following with the plus
sign will be done. So, that particular string
will be displayed. But if it was not present,
then nothing will be displayed. So, which
is actually opposite of the minus symbol.
So, I just showed the same thing here, put
a minus sign there, and you see that if the
myvar is not present, then the string that
is following the minus sign should be displayed.
And that is what is being done. So, you can
see that both the options are available the
option to display if the variable is present
option to display if the variable is absent,
both are available and now it is upto your
imagination to put it to a particular logical
sequence of operations, when you write your
shell scripts by looking at the values of
the particular variable, whether they are
set or not.
Inspecting whether the values are set or not
is also possible as I have illustrated earlier
where we use the construction like this minus
v and you can now see that the output would
tell you whether it is present or not. So,
one is for false so myvar is not available.
And you see that it was not available and
myvar is equal to hello, it is present now.
So, you see that it is present and you could
then also see that the status has changed
to true.
So, you can always inspect it as a separate
activity. But if you are, if you want to inspect
the presence or absence of a particular variable
and follow it up with a particular string
that has to be displayed or used as the value
of the string, then echo has a construction
by which you have this possibility. So, the
dollar brace construction after the colon
is something that is very powerful.